started at 4:29

## OBJECTIVE
Used Google Cloud Storage to store terraform state file. In this lab the process can be broken down into 2 phases

Phase 1: Infrastructure Preparation (Bucket & Auth) <br>
Phase 2: Migrating State to GCS Backend

### Phase 1: Infrastructure Preparation (Bucket & Auth)
Look for and Use `<PROJECT_ID>` in your lab. The `<PROJECT_ID>` is located in the cloud console page which is the landing page when you log into google cloud <br>

Copy the `<PROJECT_ID>` and paste it in notes to be used later


#### Creating an Google Cloud Storage Bucket
Used Google Cloud Storage Service to make an bucket. This is where you will store the terraform state file <br>
1. Navigated to `cloud storage > buckets > clicked create` <br>
2. Enter an value for name<br>
3. Leave defaults <br>
4. Click create

Copy the name of the bucket and pasted it somewhere for reference. This is critical for the lab you cannot do the terraform without the project id or the bucket name

### Navigated to CLI <br>
This is where we initialize google cloud. we are connect to google cloud via the CLI. This means we can create cloud infrastructure running commands
1. In the computer window launch the terminal
1. Run the initilization command `gcloud init` <br>
2. We should have default values <br>
If you dont have the default values configure the default values <br>

### Vertifying Default Values
Enter the following commands to vertify the default region and zone <br>
1. `gcloud config get-value compute/zone`
2. `gcloud config get-value compute/region`

if we have no default values follow the next few steps
1. List all possible regions, and zones
2. Set default values for region and zone

Seeing all possible values
1. gcloud compute zones list
2. gcloud compute regions list

Setting default values
1. gcloud config set compute/region [REGION_NAME]
2. gcloud config set compute/zone [ZONE_NAME]

Enter the following commands to vertify the default region and zone <br>
1. `gcloud config get-value compute/zone`
2. `gcloud config get-value compute/region`

### Navigated to Theos Repo <br>
Naviaged to Theos repo `https://github.com/rahde-class-7/SEIR-1`. This is where we get the referene code for further actions taken in the lab
1. Navigated to  `SEIR-1 > weekly_lessons > weekb > terraform_basics.txt` <br>
2. Copy the following command `gcloud auth application-default login` from terraform_basics.txt and paste the commnd in the terminal<br>
3. Now the browser is going to ask you for what gmail account to use. select an gmail account <br>
4. Now you are authenticated with the gcloud CLI <br>
5. Now you run terraform <br>

### Naviagated to Folders in the Computer<br>
1. Navigated to `class-7.5 > SEIR-7.5 > weekb > terraform` <br>
2. Right click open git here <br>
3. Enter the command `code .` <br>
4. This is the file path to get to the right folder and open it in VScode <br>
5. This is done in a way to make it very easy <br>

In the github navigated to weekb > terraform > 0-authentication.tf and copied the name <br>

### Navigated to VScode <br>
1. Created an terraform file called 0-authentication.tf <br>
- This is the file that tells terraform to connect to GCP, what terraform version to use
2. Copy and pasted the code from the github repo to the file we created <br>
3. From lines 23 to 30 erased them <br>
4. We should have lines 1 to 23 available <br>
5. Put your `<PROJECT_ID>` in `provider block > project` <br>

Seleted new terminal within VScode <br>
Within the terminal entered the following commands <br>
1. terraform init
2. terraform validate
3. terraform plan <br>
    you should see a file called terraform lock, terraform state file or .terraform you do not touch the file. you get fired instantly for touching this file
4. terraform apply

In the github navigated to weekb > terraform > 1-backend.tf and copied the name <br>

### Phase 2: Migrating State to GCS Backend

### Navigated to VScode <br>
In this section we edited the terraform file. we changed the zone to match the default zone when we intinalized the CLI, and we edited the bucket in the `terraform block` so it point to the bucket we create manually in the GUI

1. Created an terraform file called 1-backend.tf <br>
2. Copy and pasted the code from the github repo to the file we created <br>
3. Within the resource block `"google_compute_disk" "grafana_disk"` changed value of `zone` to `us-east4-a`

### Configuration to save tf.state in Google Cloud
We are going to save the state file in the cloud so it is not in the computer <br>

1. Went back to note pad and copied the name of the bucket we have created <br>
2. In `1-backend.tf` terraform file we have an `terraform` resource block, and have an attribute of `bucket` <br>
3. As an value enter the name of the GCP bucket here <br>

Summary Of Current Configuration <br>
1. Created an storage bucket within GCP
2. Created a terraform file for the configuration of an cloud architecture
3. Added some terraform files from theos repo into our local machine
4. Edited the file so what the terraform state file is now stored into the cloud. an bucket within GCP

We made the bucket in the gui first instead of within the terraform file is because terraform needs to be aware that the storage exists first before attempting to store the state file within the bucket

### In the VScode Console
5. in the terraform file `1-backend` > `terraform` resource block delete `required_providers` block. 

entered the following commands <br>
3. terraform plan <br>
    You should see a file called terraform lock, terraform state file or .terraform you do not touch the file. you get fired instantly for touching this file
4. terraform apply

At this point. this is where the terraform state file is in the cloud

### Checked the GCP console for Terraform file
1. Navigated to the GCP console > buckets > clicked on `<bucket_created>` <br>
2. Now we see a terraform folder <br>

The reason we want it to be in the cloud is so that it is less likley to have the JSON key in thte repo <br>

saving the terraform state file is an big interview question. They want to know weather or not you do it. its an easy interview question <br>

### Anything after this occured after class ended

### Further Configuration
1. In the github navigated to weekb > terraform > 2-vpc.tf and copied the name <br>
2. In vs code created an file called 2-vpc.tf
3. Pasted 2-vpc.tf code into the file

in the terminal <br>
enter the commands
1. terraform init
2. terraform validate
3. terraform plan
4. terraform apply

stopped @around 2:09:00

Note to self. refer back to class 6 and convert class 6 aws labs to GCP 

### Engineering Reflection
Gemini Prompt created Reflection questions <br>
`These are the instructions for an GCP lab. Can you write me engineering reflection questions to understand each step in the configuration, why configuration decisions were made, and questions related to an production environment.`

This lab covers one of the most critical aspects of professional cloud engineering: **State Management.** Moving from a local `terraform.tfstate` file to a remote GCS backend is the moment a project transitions from a "solo hobby" to a "team-based professional workflow."

Here are engineering reflection questions categorized by the phases of your lab.

---

## Phase 1: Infrastructure & Authentication
*Focus: Establishing the trust relationship between your machine and the Cloud.*

* **The "Chicken and Egg" Problem:** You created the GCS bucket manually in the GUI before running Terraform. Why can’t we usually use Terraform to create the *very same* bucket it intends to use for its own backend?
* **Identity & Access Management (IAM):** You ran `gcloud auth application-default login`. How does this command differ from a standard `gcloud auth login`, and why is "Application Default Credentials" (ADC) the preferred way for Terraform to "speak" to Google Cloud?
* **Configuration Drift:** If your CLI default region is set to `us-east4`, but your Terraform code specifies `us-central1`, which one "wins" when you run `terraform apply`, and why is this a potential source of errors in a team environment?

## Phase 2: Remote Backend Migration
*Focus: Centralizing the "Source of Truth" for your infrastructure.*

* **The "Fired Instantly" Rule:** You mentioned never touching the `.terraform` or `terraform.tfstate` files manually. What specific technical disaster happens if two engineers manually edit the same state file at the same time? 
    * *Hint: Research "State Locking."*
* **Security & Compliance:** You noted that storing state in the cloud makes it less likely to leak a JSON key in a repo. Beyond just keys, what sensitive information (like database passwords or private IPs) might be hidden inside a plain-text `.tfstate` file that makes it dangerous to keep on a local laptop?
* **State Migration:** When you added the `backend "gcs"` block and ran `terraform init`, Terraform asked if you wanted to migrate your state. What would happen to your existing infrastructure if you accidentally said "no" and started with a fresh, empty state file?

## Production Environment & Best Practices
*Focus: How this works at a company like Google, Netflix, or a major bank.*

* **Versioning & Recovery:** In a production GCS bucket, we usually enable **Object Versioning**. If an engineer runs a `terraform destroy` by mistake and ruins the state file, how does GCS Versioning act as a "time machine" for your infrastructure?
* **Environment Isolation:** In this lab, you used one bucket. In a production environment with `Dev`, `Staging`, and `Prod`, would you use one bucket for everything or separate buckets? Why?
* **The "Git" Integration:** Usually, we don't run `terraform apply` from a local VS Code terminal in production. We use **CI/CD (like GitHub Actions or GitLab CI)**. How does having the state file in a GCS bucket allow a remote server to manage your infrastructure without you being logged in?
* **Backend Persistence:** You deleted the `required_providers` block in `1-backend.tf`. In a professional setting, why is it actually considered "best practice" to **keep** version constraints for providers (like `google = "~> 5.0"`) to prevent your code from breaking when Google updates their API?

---
